Announce hard-fork 1 (#2)
Neptune-Crypto/cash-website: content/blog/2025-03-17-hard-fork-1.md

To continue the positive momentum of Neptune, we have decided to increase the block size limit sooner rather than later. The exact changes can be read in [this pull request](https://github.com/Neptune-Crypto/neptune-core/pull/502).

Those of you who are only interested in the mechanics of Neptune can stop reading here. But if you want some insight into the philosophy guiding our work, you may find the rest of the article interesting.

## The good, the bad, and the ugly

> There are three relevant definitions when considering changes to a blockchain: soft forks, hard forks, and reorganizations. A soft fork is a change to the rules where old versions of the software still consider the new blocks valid. If we for example were to make a rule that all block hashes had to start with the hexadecimal character "a", that would be a soft fork, as the old neptune-core versions would still consider the new blocks valid. A hard fork is a change to the rules such that new blocks will be considered invalid by the old software, an increase in the maximum allowed block size is a good example of this.  And a reorganization is the rewriting of history: Where the state of the blockchain is rolled back to an earlier state thus deleting some transactions from history.

Reviewer: I think you mean "soft forks, hard forks, and **revisions**"?

I asked perplexity.ai the question, "What is a reorganization in the context of proof-of-work blockchains?"

It responded with this (I did cull a lot of elaboration):

> In the context of proof-of-work (PoW) blockchains, a reorganization, or "reorg," occurs when the blockchain's structure is altered due to a competing chain becoming longer than the current canonical chain. This typically happens when two or more miners simultaneously mine blocks, leading to a temporary fork in the blockchain. The network resolves this conflict by following the Longest Chain Rule (LCR), which dictates that the longest valid chain is considered the legitimate one. Blocks from the shorter chain are discarded and transactions within them are reorganized into new blocks on the canonical chain
>
> Reorganizations are an inherent feature of PoW blockchains but can be minimized through efficient network communication and robust consensus mechanisms.

Reviewer: > A hard fork is a change to the rules such that new blocks will be considered invalid by the old software, an increase in the maximum allowed block size is a good example of this.

Two sentences. Full stop.

Reviewer: > And a reorganization is the rewriting of history: Where the state of the blockchain is rolled back to an earlier state thus deleting some transactions from history.

As a definition of reorganization it is not incorrect, although I would add that another sequence of events is played out, with according updates to the state. However, the point is that this meaning is not the one you use in the paragraphs below. In particular:
 - reorganizations happen all the time without changing any rules;
 - hoping and planning for zero reorganizations is irrational.

I think the word you are looking for is *revision* or *rollback*, which happens as the result of intervention by governing authorities.

In an idealized world, the rules of a blockchain would never change, so neither soft forks, hard forks, or reorganizations would be needed. But since development takes time and we all need feedback from the real world, not all changes can be considered equally bad. We consider soft forks the least problematic and reorganizations the most problematic[^5]. With hard forks in the middle.

It's worth noting though that we consider hard forks problematic for two reasons:
1. They risk splitting the network thus creating confusion about the true state of the blockchain

> 2. They introduce an element of arbitrary rule which is antithetical to the ethos of Blockchain: money without rulers.

Reviewer: These arguments are valid in the context of a well-planned and well-debated hard fork. In the context of hard forks deployed "sooner rather than later" another set of arguments apply. This article should acknowledge them, if not rebut them altogether.

> To provide a level of expectation and restrict the arbitrary power of current and future Neptune developers, the following list shows which hard forks we foresee:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide users with an idea of what to expect, and restrict the arbitrary power of current and future Neptune developers, here is a list of changes we plan to develop and whose deployment requires a hard fork:
```

> 1. increase in block size limit from 2MB to 8MB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Increase in block size limit from 2 MB to 8 MB.
```

> 2. Better representation of transaction inputs, increasing transaction throughput by at least 10x.

Reviewer: Link to the fast authentication structure authentication article again, or remind the reader that this corresponds to the long-term solution described earlier.
```suggestion
2. Better (irredundant) representation of transaction inputs, increasing transaction throughput by at least 10x.
```

3. New version of Triton VM and integration of its capabilities into consensus programs.
4. Added support for lock-free UTXOs, to provide better smart contract functionality.

> 5. Added support for transaction-chaining, to allow the spending of unconfirmed transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Allow the spending of unconfirmed UTXOs, so that dependent transactions can be chained and cut-through.
```

> This list can obviously change, and we hope that some of the changes can be bundled up, reducing the number of future hard forks. It's also worth noting that some changes, such the ability to sync by downloading only one block, a feature we call succintness, will be achievable through a soft fork.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This list can obviously change, and we hope that some of the changes can be combined to reduce the number of future hard forks. It's also worth noting that some changes, such the ability to sync by downloading only one block ("succintness") can be achieved through a soft fork, and this change in particular and other changes like it are not included in the above list.
```

[^2]: To make a short story long, Neptune is based on the UTXO model that Bitcoin also uses, and in the UTXO model you have to reference all inputs to your transactions. Unlike in Bitcoin though, the inputs to a transaction cannot easily be linked to the outputs of previous transaction, as the connection between the two are hidden behind a zero-knowledge cryptographic proof. To prove that a particular input hasn't already been spent the transaction initiator provides authentication paths into an MMR which allows for a sparse representation of a Bloom filter. It's the size of these MMR authentication paths that was not sufficiently analyzed prior to main net launch.
[^3]: Each block contains only one transaction, as all transactions included in a block is merged into one before being mined.
[^4]: We're discussing three proposals to reduce the size of transaction inputs, all of them making use if ["Fast Authentication Structure Authentication"](../learn/authentication-structure-authentication.md). The least efficient of these suggestions decrease the size of transaction outputs by around 90 %.

> [^5]: If you're reading this, it hopefully goes without saying that we intend and hope for exactly zero reorganizations.

Reviewer: > [^5]: If you're reading this, it hopefully goes without saying that we intend and hope for exactly zero reorganizations.

Why is the conditional necessary? If not, drop.
